>> Will Sentance: All right, so
we achieved a lot yesterday,
we achieved a lot.
Principles of JavaScript,
the core fundamental pieces,
that our synchronicity
executing JavaScript does.
Then higher order functions, then our
other type of higher order functions,
the ones that return functions.
Remember, any function that
takes in a function or
returns a function is
a higher-order function.
The return functions was
what gave us closures, or
what we like to call the backpack, or
what we like to call the persistent
lexical scope reference.
And that was very
impressive by all of you.
I was very, very excited to see
multiple people in this room
complete some of those tough closure
challenges afterwards, all the way
into those ones that take in a function,
wrap it, and then return out the wrap
function that behaves the same way as the
input function, but with special nuances.
If you'd known that was how it worked,
maybe that would have made it easy.
But those are really tough challenges,
and I was really impressed to see so
many of you complete those.
All right, but now, today we move
on to a land of JavaScript that
introduces pieces that we've already said,
we had all of the features of JavaScript.
But part four and five are gonna
introduce us to two additional aspects of
JavaScript that are gonna
complement what we already have.
So we said we already have our memory
thread doing the code line by line,
our core stack keeping track of these
memories and threads which is together,
or memory and thread, which is together
known as an execution context.
So these new parts are gonna
compliment those core features.
The first one is asynchronous JavaScript.
Asynchronicity, backbone of modern
web development in JavaScript.
JavaScript is single threaded,
that means doing one
line of code at a time.
Not when I start running a function,
I can continue on with my code, for
example, else outside the function.
I can't do two things at the same time.
At asynchronous, each line,
if it's displayed as the next line,
it's gonna run.
So we view in the world of JavaScript,
in the world of the Java engine, yeah.
So then we have something that's
gonna happen, some issue might arise.
What if we need to wait sometime before
we can execute certain portions of code?
What if we have a block of code
that we know we're going to want
to execute maybe when we get some fresh
data from a request to a server for
our new tweets or whatever it might be?
Or maybe for a timer to complete, and
then we want to execute this code.
So we announce this cuz we
wanna have it not actually run,
we've got to do some waiting,
we wanna wait until we run that code.
So for example,
suppose it's the functionality that says,
take the data you just got back from
the APIs, Spotify's API or whatever,
or Twitter's API, take that data.
You've had to wait for it,
but now it's come back.
Now take that data, it could be five
tweets, and display it on the webpage.
We're gonna do that waiting, we announced
the fact that we've gotta wait for
that to happen.
We've got a conundrum,
we wanna delay that running the code,
there's no point in running
the functionality saying, display my data,
display my tweets,
until the tweets are there.
Let's be really clear,
we can't display tweets if
the data hasn't arrived yet, okay?
So we've got attention between
delaying that code executing,
the bit for displaying the tweets,
but not wanting to block the thread.
Remember, we said we're doing one
thing at a time and in order.
So if the next thing is display tweets,
we aren't doing the line after that
until the data displays the tweet.
If it were there and
we can display the tweets.
So our thread one thing at a time and
in order.
So if the next thing is take the data,
display the data on the page, and
we've had to wait 400 milliseconds for
that data to come back, nothing is
happening, no code's happening afterwards.
We've got a conundrum,
we can see this is a conundrum.
What do we do?
>> Will Sentance: Do not panic yet.
Let's just see two examples to see just
how much of a confusing conundrum this is.
Our existing world of JavaScript does not
our existing world of JavaScript may
not have a solution for this situation.
Our three core features may not
have a solution for this scenario.
So let's look at the example, in what
order will our console logs appear?
So we're defining a function printHello,
inside of which we have
a console.log("Hello").
Then we're calling this setTimeout
built-in JavaScript method,
and it's gonna pass in that
printHello functionality.
And a value of 1000 milliseconds
that's going to, in theory,
delay the running of that printHello
function for 1000 milliseconds.
And then this additional
console.log("Me first!").
Okay, Katie, what order are these
console.logs gonna actually run in,
do you think?
>> Katie: I think is gonna do
Hello first and then Me first?
>> Will Sentance: Well,
that might make sense, right?
Because we've got stuff,
we've got a single threat in JavaScript.
Thank you, Katie, for saying that, that's
very good, it’s raised our attention.
[SOUND] Maybe, we've got a single
threat in JavaScript, so for
saying wait 1000 milliseconds
to run to printHello function,
in which we're going to print hello,
console.log("Hello").
Well, we should expect that to
come first before Me first.
Who has a different opinion
on how this is gonna work?
Yeah, go ahead, Lindsey.
>> Lindsey: I think it will read
the first function, setTimeout.
>> Will Sentance: But
Lindsey, this is impossible.
No, it's not, obviously, but
this is impossible because clearly it says
recalling setTimeout and if we are inside
of setTimeout doing that printing,
it's being passed into setTimeout, right?
Then it must be waiting inside
that function's execution context
before going back to global and
encountering Me first.
It must be inside a setTimeout,
new execution context inside of which we
then wait 1000 milliseconds,
in theory, and then printHello, and
then out we come at setTimeout, and
go out to global and hit console.log.
>> Will Sentance: No,
it doesn't do that for some reason.
For some reason, actually,
Lindsey's spot on, Me first happens first,
and at least 1000 milliseconds
later Hello happens.
It's not blocking, no blocking.
And the other reason the other thing
is called a, how was it called?
Something bang.
>> class: Interabang.
>> Will Sentance: Interabang,
I was reading the Wikipedia page
about it, exactly.
There you go, thank you, man.
It's old, 1923 it was around.
[SOUND] There we go.
So then all right, so
we're saying 1000 milliseconds, fine,
printHello goes off, and
somehow is run 1000 milliseconds later.
Our JavaScript system is not
explaining this, in my opinion, yet.
What about this one?
In what order do our console
logs appear here, Lindsey?
Declare printHello, Hello,
setTimeout, printHello,
pass in zero millisecond wait this time,
and then this console.log("Me first!").
Lindsey, what do you think
is gonna be the order here?
Actually, let's give Katie a chance.
What do you think, Katie,
is gonna be the order here?
>> Now I think it's gonna do Hello and
then Me first.
>> Will Sentance: That's
double down on it, Katie.
Good shout.
>> class: [LAUGH]
>> Will Sentance: What do
you think, Lindsey?
>> Lindsey: I think the same.
>> Will Sentance: Even in this situation,
printHello is gonna come after.
Man, do we think now that our current
system that was explaining JavaScript
running is sufficient?
It does not explain the situation,
does it?
All right, I've got this expression.
[LAUGH] Do you think it's sufficient?
I don't know.
>> class: [LAUGH]
>> Will Sentance: Our previous model of
JavaScript execution is insufficient.
There you go, there's your answer.
We need to introduce three new
components of our platform, or
thinking about JavaScript.
Top three, we already have thread of
execution, memory/variable environments,
and call stack that tracked those
execution contexts, that are, of course.
Remember, execution context is just,
we're doing the code line by line,
in the function or globally,
known as a thread of execution.
Threading down, executing each line.
And then the memory where you store stuff
that you encounter as you thread through,
and that's known as execution context.
And the call stack tracks
those execution contexts.
We need to add three new pieces,
web browser built-in functionality.
These are not APIs the way you think
of when you go to Twitter's API or
Google Maps' API.
Remember, API just means there is some
functionality or data out there that is
not in my application, but I can access
it and interact with it in a clean,
predictable manner, even though it may
be written in a different language,
a different server, a different owner
of the data, whatever, I can interface.
That's what API, the I stands for,
I can interface with that functionality.
And it turns out we've got to look
at does our web browser, Chrome,
Firefox, etc.,
what functionality do they give us
outside of pure JavaScript
that we can interface with?
Those of our web browser APIs,
our web browser functionality or
features, that we in
JavaScript can interface with.
Also note these are known
as background threads.
We gotta add the callback, or
message, or task queue, and
we have to add the event loop.
Event loop and callback, message,
task queue, fascinating.
We're obviously gonna look at them.
They're not as, well,
they're vital for this, but
it turns out that we're gonna start
off with our web browser APIs.